Participants
Forty-two Polish–English late bilinguals took part in the study. One participant was excluded due to excessive head motion (>2 mm) in the main fMRI task, resulting in a final sample of 41 participants (31 females, 10 males, mean age = 23.29, SD = 3.24, range: 19–32). All participants were Polish native speakers who learned English as their second language. To participate in the experiment, they had to declare sufficient proficiency in English (B2 or higher) and obtain at least 20/25 points on the General English Test by Cambridge Assessment (mean score = 21.32, SD = 1.94). In the behavioral session, the participants’ proficiency in English was assessed again using LexTale (mean score = 71.58%, SD = 9.91%; Lemhöfer & Broersma, 2012). In addition, participants completed a questionnaire in which they rated their proficiency in all known languages with regards to reading, writing, listening, speaking, and accent; participants also gave information on their daily use of all languages and the age at which they started to learn each of them. Detailed information on the participants’ proficiency, age of acquisition, and daily use of languages can be found in Table 1. All participants gave written consent for participation in the study. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institute of Psychology of the Jagiellonian University concerning experimental studies with human subjects.

Table 1. 
Language experience of participants

Language	L1 (Polish)	L2 (English)	L3 (various)	L4 (various)
n 	41 	41 	36 	17 
Self-rated proficiency (1–10) 
Reading 	9.72 	4.34 	2.76 	1.79 
Listening 	9.62 	4.10 	2.45 	1.84 
Writing 	9.26 	3.81 	2.21 	1.48 
Speaking 	9.49 	3.89 	2.48 	1.68 
Accent 	9.56 	3.45 	2.45 	1.65 
Language learning 
Age of acquisition onset of learning 	0.00 	6.44 	14.34 	15.24 
Age of acquisition onset of using 	3.17 	9.15 	15.41 	16.88 
Years of formal education 	14.72 	11.56 	4.03 	4.18 
Daily use of languages 
Passive 	63.26% 	31.79% 	4.03% 	3.25% 
Active 	81.31% 	16.31% 	2.06% 	1.31% 
Verbal fluency (mean number of words produced) 
Category 	20.04 	13.36 	– 	– 
Letter 	12.64 	10.62 	– 	– 
Note. Information on self-rated proficiency, language learning and daily use of languages is given for all languages that participants declared to know. L1 always refers to Polish and L2 to English. L3 and L4 were a variety of different languages (incl. German, French, Italian, Spanish, Russian, Czech, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Latin and Esperanto). Not all the participants reported knowing an L3 or L4.
Study Design
The experiment consisted of three testing sessions: one behavioral and two MRI scanning sessions. The design of the behavioral and MRI sessions is presented in detail in Figure 1, and the details of each task are discussed in the Design section.

Figure 1. 
Summary of the design of the behavioral and MRI sessions. In the behavioral sessions, all participants completed the tasks in a fixed order. In the MRI sessions, the order of conditions completed in the first and second sessions (experimental manipulation with L1 or L2) was independently counterbalanced between participants; the set of localizer tasks assigned to each session was also counterbalanced between participants. L1 = native language, L2 = second language, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MD = multiple demand.
View largeDownload slide
Summary of the design of the behavioral and MRI sessions. In the behavioral sessions, all participants completed the tasks in a fixed order. In the MRI sessions, the order of conditions completed in the first and second sessions (experimental manipulation with L1 or L2) was independently counterbalanced between participants; the set of localizer tasks assigned to each session was also counterbalanced between participants. L1 = native language, L2 = second language, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MD = multiple demand.

In the behavioral session, participants completed a series of tasks, including semantic and phonetic verbal fluency in L1 and L2 (see details below), LexTale in English (Lemhöfer & Broersma, 2012), a language questionnaire, and a short version of Raven’s Progressive Matrices test (only uneven items) as a measure of a nonverbal intelligence. The behavioral session also included a short training session on the tasks to be performed in the MRI sessions.

During the MRI sessions, participants completed the main task, namely picture naming, and a series of localizer tasks. The main task was split between two sessions, with one condition (L1 or L2 in the first block) completed in the first session and the other condition completed in the second session, with the order counterbalanced across sessions. Localizer tasks included an auditory language localizer task (Malik-Moraleda et al., 2022; Scott et al., 2017), an articulation localizer, a Stroop task, a visual working memory task corresponding to the MD localizer (Fedorenko et al., 2013), and a verbal fluency task (order counterbalanced; see Figure 1 for details). In tasks requiring overt spoken responses (i.e., picture naming, Stroop task, articulation task, and verbal fluency) participants’ responses were recorded with FOMRI III, which is an MR-compatible, fiber-optic microphone system (Optoacoustics, Or-Yehuda, Israel). Participants were instructed to minimize jaw movements while giving the spoken responses, which they had practiced during the behavioral session.

Materials and Procedure
Behavioral session
Verbal fluency task.
In this task, participants were asked to produce as many words belonging to a given category (fruits or animals) or beginning with a given letter (B or M) as they could within a 1 min time limit. Cues were counterbalanced between languages. Each participant first completed the task in Polish (with one category and one letter) and then in English (also with one category and one letter). Each cue (letter or category) was displayed on the screen for 1 min, during which participants provided verbal responses that were recorded with the microphone. This task was used as a complementary measure of relative proficiency in L1 and L2; the mean number of words produced for letter and category tasks in each language is reported in Table 1.

LexTale.
In the LexTale task, participants were instructed to say whether the string of letters presented on a screen corresponded to an existing word in English. The response (yes/no) was provided via a keyboard. Each word or nonword appeared in the center of the screen and remained there until the participant responded. The task used the same words and nonwords as the original LexTale task (Lemhöfer & Broersma, 2012).

Language questionnaire.
In the language questionnaire, participants were asked to respond to four categories of questions. The first category concerned proficiency in the native and foreign languages that the participants knew. It included a self-rating scale on the five language skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking, and accent) and questions concerning the age of acquisition. The second category included questions on patterns of language use: the participants were asked to estimate how much time during a typical day they actively (i.e., speaking, writing) and passively (i.e., watching movies, reading, listening to music/radio/podcasts) use the languages they know. In the third category, participants were asked to provide information about language use contexts: home, work, school, and free time. Specifically, they were asked to estimate the number of hours that they use each language they know in each of these contexts. The fourth category of questions referred to demographic information, such as age, gender, and education. Filling out the entire questionnaire took approximately 15–20 min.

MRI task training.
In this part of the behavioral session, participants completed short versions of the tasks that they were going to perform during the MRI session. (For details of the tasks see the MRI session design.) Each task lasted approximately 1–2 min and was repeated if a participant asked for more practice. In tasks requiring overt responses, participants were asked to practice minimizing jaw movements while speaking.

Raven test.
In this task, participants completed a shortened version of Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices test (only odd-numbered items). They had 20 min to complete as many matrices as they could. The test was used in a paper–pencil format and was aimed to provide a measure of fluid intelligence.

MRI sessions—the main task
In the main task, participants were asked to overtly name pictures of objects in four task blocks: two blocks in each session. One task block corresponded to one functional run. The first block of each session corresponded to one of the experimental manipulations: exposure to L1 (which required naming pictures in L1) or exposure to L2 (which required naming pictures in L2). The order of experimental manipulation blocks was counterbalanced between participants; that is, some of them started with the L2 exposure conditions in the first session and completed the L1 exposure condition in the second session, and some of them started with the L1 exposure condition in the first session and completed the L2 exposure condition in the second session. In the second block of each session, participants were asked to name pictures in L1. Each block contained 55 colored pictures representing objects (from the cross-linguistic lexical tasks, or CLT, database; Haman et al., 2015; Wolna et al., 2023). Pictures were not repeated between blocks. Each block started with a fixation cross (“+”) displayed on a screen for 7,000 ms. Subsequently, 55 pictures were presented following a rapid event-related design. Each picture was displayed on a white background for 2,000 ms and was followed by a fixation cross, jittered at an interstimulus interval ranging from 607 ms to 10,144 ms (M = 3,091 ms, SD = 2,225 ms). The order of picture presentation and interstimulus intervals was optimized using optseq2 (Dale, 1999). Finally, at the end of each block, a fixation cross was presented for 8,000 ms. Overall, each block of the picture naming task lasted 295 s.

MRI sessions—localizer tasks
After completing the main task, in each session participants completed two or three localizer tasks. Each localizer consisted of two functional runs.

Language localizer.
Participants listened to fragments of Alice in Wonderland in L1 and distorted speech recordings in which it was impossible to understand what the speaker was saying. The task followed the design introduced by Scott et al. (2017) and Malik-Moraleda et al. (2022), in which the localizer contrast was based on the intact > distorted speech condition contrast. The intact condition consisted of short passages from Alice in Wonderland read by the native speaker. The distorted speech condition was created based on the intact condition but sounded like speech degraded by poor radio reception, with preserved prosody but without decipherable words or phonemes. In each functional run, participants listened to six short passages from Alice in Wonderland in their native language (18 s each) and six passages of distorted speech (18 s each). Additionally, four fixation blocks (12 s each) were included in each run. The total duration of each run was 264 s. Each participant completed two runs of the task.

Articulation localizer.
Participants performed two tasks: an articulation task in which they were asked to repeat out loud a string of previously memorized syllables (“bła” [bwa], “sza” [ʂa], “tra” [tra]—all frequently occurring in Polish as word constituents, but meaningless in isolation), and a motor task in which they were asked to perform a simple motor sequence with the fingers of both hands (touching the thumb with their index, ring, and little finger, respectively). The localizer was based on the articulation > motor sequence contrast. In each functional run, participants completed six articulation and six finger tapping blocks (18 s each). Additionally, four fixation blocks (12 s each) were included in each run. Each participant completed two runs of the task.

Stroop localizer.
Participants were asked to overtly name the color of the presented word. The design of the task followed the one used by Fedorenko et al. (2011), in which participants completed blocks of the easy and hard versions of the task. In the easy condition, the words corresponded to non-color adjectives (“daleki” [“far”], “wysoki” [“tall”], “głęboki” [“deep”]); in the hard condition, the words corresponded to color adjectives (“niebieski” [“blue”], “zielony” [“green”], “czerwony” [“red”]). In the hard condition, half of the trials were conflict trials in which the word’s font color did not match its meaning; the other half were congruent trials. The order of trials within the hard condition was randomized. Each run started with a fixation cross (“+”) displayed on a gray background for 8,000 ms. Following that, participants completed 16 task blocks (8 per condition, 18 s each). Task blocks contained 12 trials which started with a fixation cross displayed for 500 ms followed by a word displayed for 1,000 ms. Additionally, five fixation blocks (18 s) were included in each run. The order of experimental and fixation blocks was counterbalanced between participants and runs (four counterbalance lists were created and each participant completed two of them). The localizer was based on the hard > easy condition contrast. The total duration of one run was 394 s. Each participant completed two runs of the task.

Multiple demand localizer.
Participants were asked to perform a spatial working memory task (e.g., Fedorenko et al., 2011; Fedorenko et al., 2013). The design of this task followed the one used by Fedorenko et al. (2011), in which the localizer contrast was based on the hard > easy condition contrast. In each trial, participants saw four 3 × 4 grids and were asked to memorize the locations of the fields that were marked as black on each of the grids. In the easy condition, they had to memorize one location per grid (four in total); in the hard condition, they had to keep track of two locations per grid (eight in total). After memorizing the grids, participants had to choose a grid that contained all the memorized locations from among two grids presented on the screen. Each trial started with a fixation cross displayed on the screen for 500 ms; this was followed by four grids, each displayed for 1,000 ms. After that, the choice task appeared on the screen until a response was given (for a max of 3,750 ms); this was followed by feedback (right or wrong) displayed for 250 ms and a fixation cross, which was displayed for 3,750 ms minus the reaction time in the choice task. In each of the conditions (easy and hard) participants completed four trials per block (34 s in total). Each run contained five easy condition blocks and five hard condition blocks. Additionally, six fixation blocks (16 s) were included in each run. The order of experimental and fixation blocks was counterbalanced between participants and runs (four counterbalance lists were created and each participant completed two of them). The total duration of one run was 438 s.

Verbal fluency localizer.
Within 10 s blocks, participants were asked to produce as many words as they could that either pertained to a given category (semantic fluency) or started with a given letter (phonemic fluency). The entire task was completed in L1. In each run, participants completed six semantic fluency and six phonemic fluency blocks, each focusing on a separate letter or semantic category. Each letter and category were presented only once, and they did not repeat between blocks and runs. A full list of stimuli used in this task is in the Supplementary Materials, available at https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00128. In addition, each run included five baseline blocks, in which participants were asked to enumerate the months starting from January (Birn et al., 2010). The localizer contrast was based on task (semantic or phonemic fluency) > baseline condition contrast. Following Birn et al. (2010), each block was followed by a fixation cross displayed for 7–13 s. Each run lasted 348 s. Each participant completed two runs of the task.

MRI Data Acquisition
MRI data were acquired using a 3T scanner (Magnetom Skyra, Siemens) with a 64-channel head coil. High-resolution, whole-brain anatomical images were acquired using a T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence (208 sagittal slices; voxel size 0.9 × 0.9 × 0.9 mm3; TR = 1,800 ms, TE = 2.32 ms, flip angle = 8°). A gradient field map (magnitude and phase images) was acquired with a dual-echo gradient-echo sequence, matched spatially with fMRI scans (TE1 = 4.92 ms, TE2 = 7.3 ms, TR = 503 ms, flip angle = 60°). Functional T2*-weighted images were acquired using a whole-brain echo-planar (EPI) pulse sequence (50 axial slices, 3 × 3 × 3 mm isotropic voxels; TR = 1,400 ms; TE = 27 ms; flip angle = 70°; field of view 192 mm; MB acceleration factor 2; in-plane GRAPPA acceleration factor 2 and phase encoding A >> P) using 2D multiband EPI sequences from the Center for Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR), University of Minnesota (Xu et al., 2013). In order to account for magnetic saturation effects, the first four volumes of each sequence were not included in the analysis.

MRI Data Preprocessing
All data were visually inspected for artifacts. The non-brain tissue was removed using the FSL Brain Extraction Tool (Smith, 2002). For the preprocessing of functional data, we used FSL FEAT (Version 6.0.0; Woolrich et al., 2001). The preprocessing steps included high-pass temporal filtering (100 s), spatial smoothing (full width at half maximum = 5 mm), distortion correction of functional images using fieldmap with FUGUE, co-registration and normalization using FLIRT (Jenkinson et al., 2002; Jenkinson & Smith, 2001) and motion correction using MCFLIRT (Jenkinson et al., 2002) with six rigid-body transformations. Functional images were co-registered with their anatomical images; subsequently, they were registered to MNI standard space (FSL’s 2 mm standard brain template).

MRI Data Analysis
In the first-level statistical analysis, a double-gamma hemodynamic response function was used to model the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal corresponding to each event (trial in the main task, as it followed the event-related design; and blocks in the localizer tasks which followed a blocked design). The estimates of motion obtained with MCFLIRT (Jenkinson et al., 2002) were included in the first-level generalized linear model as nuisance covariates. For the localizer tasks, the two functional runs of each localizer task were combined in a second-level analysis for each participant using an FSL fixed-effect model. To ensure better comparability of our findings with previous studies, for language, MD, and articulation localizers we used sets of functional parcels established and validated by previous studies instead of creating group-level parcels based on our data (12 language parcels: Fedorenko et al., 2010; 20 MD parcels: Fedorenko et al., 2013; 11 articulation parcels: Basilakos et al., 2018). It is important to note that the group-level parcels from previous studies showed a high overlap with parcels for the language, MD, and articulation networks defined based on our data. For the remaining Stroop and verbal fluency localizers, group-constrained subject-specific regions of interest (ROIs) were defined for each participant following the approach proposed by Fedorenko et al. (2010). In the first step, the individual subject activation maps thresholded at 5% of most active voxels. In most cases this threshold was slightly more conservative than z > 3.1, uncorrected at the whole-brain level. We chose to use the 5% of most active voxels instead of a standard threshold because it yielded maps with comparable numbers of voxels between subjects that consequently produced more coherent group-level parcels. Subsequently, the individual parcels were binarized and overlaid on top of each other. The probabilistic map obtained this way was then thresholded so that only voxels active in more than five participants (∼20%) would be included. In the second step, the probabilistic maps were smoothed using an 8 × 8 × 8 Gaussian kernel and, subsequently, group-level partitions were created using a watershed algorithm for segmentation. This procedure yielded 19 group-level parcels for the Stroop task and 15 group-level parcels for the verbal fluency task. Before further analyses, we excluded very small parcels (mean size across subjects <10 voxels). This yielded a final set of 13 parcels within the Stroop network and 13 parcels within the verbal fluency network. In each of these parcels significant activation to the localizer contrast, that is, color words > neutral words for the Stroop task and fluency > automated speech for verbal fluency (thresholded at z > 2, corrected for multiple comparison using a cluster-wise correction at p < 0.05) was found in at least 51% of participants for the Stroop parcels (mean = 70.36%) and in at least 73.17% of participants for the verbal fluency parcels (mean = 84.99%). In the last step, group-level partitions were intersected with subject-specific data, thus yielding a set of subject-specific group-constrained ROIs. Finally, we selected the top 10% most responsive voxels within each parcel based on the z value map for a given localizer contrast (language: speech > degraded speech; MD: hard > easy visual working memory task; articulation: syllables > motor sequence; Stroop: color words > neutral words; and verbal fluency: fluency > automated speech), and we binarized the obtained ROIs. We then used the ROIs corresponding to all localizer tasks to extract parameter estimates corresponding to percent signal change in the two critical conditions of the main task: naming in L1 after L1, and naming in L1 after L2. Parameter estimates were extracted from the first-level analyses for each participant separately. For the analysis of the functional localizer scope, we used an across-run cross-validation procedure to extract the percent signal change corresponding to each localizer task condition (i.e., we defined the functional parcels based on the first functional run and estimated responses to the localizer contrast on the second run and repeated this procedure using the second run to define the functional parcels and the first run to extract response estimates; see Fedorenko et al., 2010). This was done using FSL’s FEATquery tool (https://www.FMRIb.ox.ac.uk/fsl/feat5/featquery.html). Further analyses were performed on the extracted parameter estimates in R (Version: 4.0.2; R Core Team, 2020). Following an approach that proposes modeling activity within a functional network on the network level instead of relying on separate analyses for each ROI (Malik-Moraleda et al., 2021), we fitted one linear mixed-effect model for each functional network according to the following formula:
In each model, the fixed effect of PrecedingLanguage corresponded to a predictor with two levels: L1 after L1 and L1 after L2. Before the analysis, this categorical predictor was deviation-coded (L1 after L1 = −0.5; L1 after L2 = 0.5). The analysis was performed using the lmer() function from the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova et al., 2017). For each functional network, we first fitted a maximal model and then identified the best random-effects structure following the recommendations of Bates et al. (2018). The reason for modeling the activity within each network with ROI as a random effect instead of a fixed effect relies on the assumption that the different brain regions engaged within a given functional network exhibit a significant degree of functional integration. To further explore the fine-grained differences between our critical conditions, which might only affect a subset of functional parcels within each network, we also fitted separate models for each ROI in each of the functional networks. The results of the ROI-specific analyses are reported in the Supplementary Materials. Raw neuroimaging data used in this study are freely available at the OpenNeuro repository (https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds004456). Data and code necessary to reproduce the ROI and behavioral analyses are freely available at https://osf.io/59za8/.