Methods
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Massachusetts General Hospital and met the scientific and ethical guidelines for human pain research of the Helsinki Accord and the International Association for the Study of Pain (http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/). The methods used in this study were carried out in accordance with the guidelines approved by Institutional Review Board of the Massachusetts General Hospital.

Probe and System
Data were collected using a multichannel imager operating at 690 and 830 nm (TechEn Inc. MA, USA, CW6 System). The probe contained 11 sources and 16 detectors (~3 cm distance from the source “long separation detectors”) and 11 short separation detectors (~8 mm distance from each source) (Figure 7, panel A and B). The long separation channels are sensitive to the brain and superficial layers (the scalp and the skull) while the short separation channels are sensitive to superficial layers only. The probe covers the somatosensory and motor areas as well as the frontal cortex.

Subjects and Experimental Design
Eleven healthy subjects were included in the study (right handed, male, 28 ± 5 (mean ± std) years old). Each subject gave informed written consent prior to the experiments. Subjects with a history of neurological trauma or psychiatric disorders, or who were unable to keep their head still, were excluded.

Prior to the actual experiment, electrical stimulation was applied to each subject's left thumb through electrodes with a 5 Hz electrical stimulator (Neurometer CPT, Neurotron, Baltimore, MD) to determine current levels that elicited subjective ratings of 3/10 (innocuous) and 7/10 (noxious) from each subject. The electrical stimulus was increased from baseline (0.7 mA) by 0.05 mA increments, while the subjects were expected to specify when the electrical stimulus reaches to a pain level of 3 (innocuous) and 7 (noxious) on a 0 to 10 scale. These current values were used in the actual experiment.

During the actual experiment, randomized innocuous and noxious electrical stimuli at 5 Hz were applied by a neurometer (Neurotron Inc. Baltimore, MD). Each stimulus lasted 5 seconds, followed by a 25 second rest. Each run lasted 12.5 minutes and consisted of 12 innocuous and 12 noxious stimuli which were randomly ordered (Figure 7, panel C).

Following the NIRS acquisition, the 3D positions of the sources and detectors were obtained using a 3D digitizer (Polhemus Inc., VT).

Data Analysis and Statistics
The raw NIRS signal was first converted into changes in optical density by taking the logarithm of the signal. The channels lower than 80 dB and higher than 140 dB were excluded from the analysis. The changes in oxygenated-hemoglobin (HbO) and deoxygenated-hemoglobin (HbR) concentrations were then obtained using the modified Beer-Lambert law with a partial pathlength factor of 64,5,6. Motion artifacts were detected using hmrMotionArtifact function under HOMER243 and the trials that have motion artifacts within −2 to 15 second window were excluded before the trial averaging analysis. A total of six trials were lost out of 66 trials across the 11 subject. The hemodynamic response function (HRF) was then estimated by a general linear model approach that uses ordinary least squares. The response was modeled using consecutive Gaussian temporal basis functions with a standard deviation of 0.5 second and their means separated by 0.5 second over the regression time range of −2 to 20 seconds as we have used previously in Ref. 44. The short separation channel with the highest correlation with a given long separation channel was used as a static estimator and regressed out from the long distance channel while simultaneously estimating the HRF as in Gagnon et al., 201144. The method makes the assumption that the signal measured at the short separation channel represents the superficial layers and the signal measured at the long separation channel represents both brain tissue and superficial layers. Thus using short separation channels, the effect of systemic physiology can be captured from superficial layers and then can be used as regressors to filter systemic interference from the long separation channels to provide a more robust estimation of the underlying hemodynamic response to brain activation. Analysis was carried out using the open source software HOMER2, which is implemented in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA).

T-tests were used to determine statistically significant differences in hemodynamic responses to innocuous and noxious stimuli in the first three minutes of acquisition as well as significant differences in the hemodynamic response in the first three minutes as compared to the second three minutes. The channels used and the time range averaged for these t-tests are shown in Figures 1 to 5. The channels used for the motor-sensory and the frontal region analysis are labelled with pink and purple stars respectively in Figure 7, panel A.