Methods
Participants and measures
Anxious youth and healthy volunteers (HV) were recruited through referral to participate in the study at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, United States, and enrolled in a protocol (01-M-0192; Principal Investigator: D.S.P.) for an ongoing clinical trial. Patients were considered for enrollment if they had a diagnosis of any DSM-5 anxiety disorder established by a licensed clinician using the KSADS (Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia). Exclusion criteria for all participants were a history of psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, developmental disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, substance use disorder, contraindication to MRI scan, use of medication, or an estimated IQ lower than 70 (as measured by the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence). HV also were excluded if they had any current psychiatric diagnoses. All parents and research participants provided written informed consent/assent in a protocol approved by the NIH Institutional Review Board (IRB).

Symptom severity and treatment response was assessed using the Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale (PARS) (The Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Anxiety Study Group, 2002), the gold-standard clinician-administered assessment incorporating both child and parent reports. The PARS was administered at four time points before, during (Weeks 3 and 8), and after treatment. The total PARS score ranges from 0 to 25, with a clinical cut-off of nine or higher indicating a likely presence of an anxiety disorder. In addition to CBT administered by experts, all patients received either an active or sham version of attention-bias modification therapy (ABMT). To maximize sample sizes, groups were combined irrespective of randomization to either active or sham ABMT. CBT in this sample was delivered using a standardized protocol, consisting of 12 weekly sessions (Silverman & Ginsburg, 1998; Silverman, Rey, Marin, Jaccard, & Pettit, 2022). The first three treatment sessions entail an introduction to CBT, psychoeducation, and self-monitoring/tracking. Starting at session four, participants complete in-session exposures and learn cognitive restructuring strategies and coping mechanisms (Lebowitz, Marin, Martino, Shimshoni, & Silverman, 2019). For additional details, see (Haller et al., 2024).

The above forms our main dataset (Dataset A). To determine whether the results obtained are replicable, we used a small sample of N = 15 (Dataset B) individuals who participated in a previous 8-week clinical trial to study the effects of CBT on pediatric anxiety (White et al., 2017), also under protocol 01-M-0192. It used a different resting state sequence, and CBT in this study followed the Coping Cat protocol (Podell, Mychailyszyn, Edmunds, Puleo, & Kendall, 2010). The eight sessions aim to develop skills to recognize signs of anxiety and anxious thoughts, relaxation techniques, and coping. Again, we use only patients with resting-state fMRI from up to 90 days before or 30 days after initiating treatment and who had available PARS at baseline and at the end of treatment (8 weeks). Demographic characteristics and MRI acquisition parameters for both datasets are described in Table 1 and Table 2 and in the Supplementary Material.

Connectome predictive modeling
The CPM analysis included only patients who had an available resting state fMRI scan collected up to 90 days before or 30 days after treatment initiation. As the primary objective was to assess treatment response, the main analysis excluded those who did not have available PARS at baseline or at 12 weeks. The baseline PARS came from either the screening visit or the third week of treatment, prior to the exposure-based portion of the treatment, and closer in time to the date of the MRI scan acquisition. A full sample description is provided in Supplementary Table 1. We used the methods outlined in Shen et al. (2017). Before conducting CPM, we verified that motion (as assessed via average framewise displacement) would not be a good predictor of the PARS score (Dataset A: Inline graphic = −0.2030, Inline graphic = 0.1380; Dataset B: Inline graphic = 0.0877, Inline graphic = 0.7544; two-tailed p-values assessed with 10,000 permutations). The rsFC matrices for every subject were tested for their association with PARS at the end of treatment; significantly ( Inline graphic < 0.01) associated edges were selected, and their rsFC Fisher’s Inline graphic -to- Inline graphic values summed. These sums were used as independent variables in a second linear regression.

Cross-validation
Regression coefficients from the second model were used to predict, in a leave-one-out cross-validation loop, the PARS score of a subject unseen in the previous steps. This analysis used the patients from Dataset A.

External validation
Regression coefficients from the second model with Dataset A were used to predict the PARS score of all patients in Dataset B.

Selection of significant edges in the initial step of CPM can consider edges that are positively correlated with PARS, negatively correlated, or both; edges can also be selected using other criteria. We departed from (Shen et al., 2017) in two aspects: (1) we investigated the inclusion of age and sex in the second regression model as predictors of interest and, separately, as nuisance, as well as without any such additional regressors as in the original publication; and (2) in addition to investigating the performance of using only positively correlated, negatively correlated, and both sets of edges, we also investigated the performance of CPM when using the most discriminative edges identified using fingerprinting; details of these two departures from the original method are provided below, and results from these various models are presented in the Supplementary Material. Model performance was assessed using the mean absolute error (MAE), the simple correlation coefficient ( Inline graphic ) between observed ( Inline graphic ) and predicted values ( Inline graphic ), and a version of the coefficient of determination ( Inline graphic ) that is suitable for cross-validation and is computed as (Kvålseth, 1985):

graphic file with name S0033291724003131_eqnu1.jpg
Note that Inline graphic does not correspond to the square of the correlation coefficient Inline graphic ; for commentary on the merits of each metric, see (Chicco, Warrens, & Jurman, 2021; Poldrack, Huckins, & Varoquaux, 2020). Confidence intervals (95%) were computed for these three quantities using 1000 bootstraps (Davison & Hinkley, 1997).

Anatomical predictive modeling
We investigated how replacing rsFC in CPM with measurements of brain morphology, which we termed APM, would impact predictions. To facilitate comparison with CPM, the APM analysis considers the same individuals. Surface-based representations of the brain were obtained with FreeSurfer 6.0.1, as part of fMRIprep processing, and resampled into the ‘fsaverage5’ space (a brain mesh with the same topology of a geodesic sphere produced by 5 recursive subdivisions of an icosahedron), which contains 20,484 vertices spanning both hemispheres; we removed those with constant variance, thus masking out non-cortical regions, to a total of 18,742 vertices used for analysis (compare to 23,220 unique edges used for analysis in the rsFC-based models). We investigated 5 different cortical morphometric measurements (area, thickness, curvature, sulcal depth, and gray/white matter contrast) and two levels of smoothing (FWHM = 0 and 15 mm).

Nuisance variables
The prediction may make use of other variables, such as age and sex, or consider these as a nuisance. In the former case, they are included as additional regressors in both stages of CPM and, subsequently, as additional predictors (Rao, Monteiro, & Mourao-Miranda, 2017). In the latter case, these variables are likewise included in the first regression model of CPM (that identifies edges), whereas in the second regression, both data and model are residualized with respect to these variables in the training set; the estimated regression coefficients from the training set are then to residualize also the test set (Snoek, Miletić, & Scholte, 2019); prediction uses then residualized variables, with coefficients of variables of interest and of no interest estimated from the training set. Nuisance effects can be added back to the predicted values to ensure results are compatible with the quantities of interest. If the data used for testing contains a substantial number of subjects, an improved model consists of residualizing the test set using estimated nuisance effects from the test set itself, as opposed to from the training set, thus reducing the risk of covariate shift (Rao et al., 2017). We investigated models without nuisance variables, as well as with age and sex (and scanner where appropriate). For the cross-validation case, in which it is not possible to estimate nuisance effects from test samples (in a leave-one out cross-validation, the test set has only one subject), we used the regression coefficients for nuisance variables obtained from the training set (Snoek et al., 2019), whereas for external validation, nuisance effects were estimated directly from the test set.

Fingerprinting
The fingerprinting analysis included only participants with at least two fMRI sessions within one year of each other. Subjects included in the primary data were allowed to be included in the fingerprinting analysis if they had a follow-up rsfMRI available. The sample characteristics are described in Supplementary Table 2. Fingerprinting with sMRI used the same individuals to facilitate comparison between the two approaches. We followed the methods outlined in (Finn et al., 2015). Each subject had two resting state scans, collected on average 123 days apart. The rsFC matrix was unwrapped into a vector, and then the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between every baseline rsFC of every subject with every follow-up rsFC was computed, providing an index of similarity. Subject identification was successful if, for every baseline rsFC matrix, the most similar follow-up rsFC matrix belongs to the same subject. As the most similar follow-up is allowed to be repeated (i.e. with replacement), the p-value for the number of correct identifications ( Inline graphic ) can be computed using a binomial distribution with parameters Inline graphic = number of subjects, Inline graphic and location Inline graphic .

Correlations can be interpreted as the dot product of vectors normalized to unit variance (Rodgers & Nicewander, 1988). This provides an indicator of the contribution of each edge to the final correlation. Let the correlation be expressed as (Finn et al., 2015):

graphic file with name S0033291724003131_eqnu2.jpg
where Inline graphic is the number of edges, Inline graphic , Inline graphic is the normalized value of the rsFC at edge Inline graphic for subject Inline graphic at baseline, and Inline graphic is the normalized rsFC at the same edge for subject Inline graphic at follow-up. If Inline graphic , Inline graphic is the correlation between a subject’s own baseline and follow-up rsFC matrices. The quantity Inline graphic is interesting because, if Inline graphic and Inline graphic , then edge Inline graphic contributes to the identification of the subject’s rsFC at the other time point. An estimator of the probability Inline graphic that an edge makes such contribution by chance is given by:

graphic file with name S0033291724003131_eqnu3.jpg
where Inline graphic is the indicator (Kronecker) function, and Inline graphic is the number of subjects. Note that the above formulation is different than the one originally proposed by (Finn et al., 2015); edges that are highly predictive can have Inline graphic as low as Inline graphic , as opposed to zero; edges that are not predictive can have Inline graphic as high as Inline graphic . A global estimate of the differential power (DP) of a given edge for subject identification can be computed as:

graphic file with name S0033291724003131_eqnu4.jpg
where the quantity Inline graphic follows an exponential distribution with rate parameter 1 if the true (unknown) Inline graphic follows a uniform distribution. The constant 2 adjusts that rate to 1/2. An exponential distribution with rate parameter 1/2 is a Chi-squared distribution with 2 degrees of freedom; the sum of Inline graphic random variables following this distribution also follows a Chi-squared distribution, now with 2 Inline graphic degrees of freedom. Thus, the hypothesis that an edge is more informative than could be expected by chance can be tested. This formulation also allows the selection of edges (e.g. for later analyses, such as in CPM) using a threshold based on the probability distribution under the null hypothesis of chance DP. Note that the above formulation of Inline graphic is also different from the original work by (Finn et al., 2015).

Anatomical fingerprinting
Following (Mansour L et al., 2021), we also investigate fingerprinting using measures of cortical morphology: area, thickness, curvature, sulcal depth, and gray/white matter contrast, as opposed to only unwrapped rsFC matrices. Fingerprinting methods are otherwise the same as for rsFC data. Surface-based cortical measurements were as with APM.